---
title: Vue.js is omakase
author: Ross Kaffenberger
published: false
summary: Vue.js is omakase
description: Vue.js is omakase
pull_image: 'blog/stock/kuba-boski-sushi-unsplash.jpg'
pull_image_caption: Photo by Kuba Boski on Unsplash
series:
category: Code
tags:
  - Rails
  - Vue
---

David Heinemeier Hansson, the creator the Ruby on Rails framework, previously wrote [Rails is omakase](https://dhh.dk//2012/rails-is-omakase.html) and what that means for both users of and contributors to the framework. Here, I borrow DHH's premise to describe why I believe Vue.js too is omakase and why that makes it a great choice for team's deciding on a frontend JavaScript framework.

> There are lots of à la carte software environments in this world... It's a very popular way of consuming software. Rails is not that. Rails is omakase. A team of chefs picked out the ingredients, designed the APIs, and arranged the order of consumption on your behalf according to their idea of what would make for a tasty full-stack framework. The menu can be both personal and quirky. It isn't designed to appeal to the taste of everyone, everywhere.

My late wife and I lived in New York City together where our favorite restaurant was Zenkichi. It's in small, almost unnoticeable, building with discernable markings located near the East River in the Williamsburg of Brooklyn. The interior appears entirely hand-crafted from wood. It is dark and romantic. Each table upstairs is like a small private dining room with a pull-down curtain and a small buzzer to summon the wait staff. Though patrons may choose to order à la carte, we always ate omakase, where the chef chooses all the courses for us. We realized this was a gamble—of course, some courses weren't to our liking—but we trusted the thought and expertise that had gone into the decision-making.
